Even as we face
an economic crisis which demands
our constant focus, forces of
nature can also intervene in
ways that create other crises
to which we must respond - and
respond urgently.
For the people of North and
South Dakota and Minnesota who
live along rivers spilling over
their banks, this is one such
moment.
Rivers and streams throughout
the region have flooded or are
at risk of flooding.
The cities of Fargo and
neighboring Moorhead are
vulnerable as the waters of
the Red River have risen.
Thousands of homes and
businesses are threatened.
That's why, on Tuesday, I
granted a major disaster
declaration request for the
State of North Dakota and
ordered federal support into the
region to help state and local
officials respond
to the flooding.
This was followed by an
emergency declaration for the
State of Minnesota.
And we are also keeping close
watch on the situation in South
Dakota as it develops.
The Department of Homeland
Security and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency
continue to coordinate the
federal response.
Homeland Security Secretary
Janet Napolitano is helping to
oversee federal efforts and she
remains in close contact with
state officials.
Acting FEMA administrator Nancy
Ward has been in the region
since yesterday to meet with
folks on the ground and survey
the area herself.
In addition, The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is
assisting in the emergency construction of levees.
The Coast Guard is aiding in
search and rescue efforts while
the Department of Defense is
helping to move people and
supplies.
Members of the National Guard
have been activated and are on
the scene as well.
Hospitals and nursing homes in
the area are being evacuated and
residents in poor health or
with special needs are being
transported to higher ground.
Teams from the Department of
Health and Human Services are
aiding in this work.
And the Red Cross is in place to
provide shelter and supplies for
folks in need.
It is also important for
residents in these states to
remain vigilant in monitoring
reports on flood crests and to
follow instructions from their
state and local leaders in the
event that evacuations
become necessary.
My administration is working
closely with Governors John
Hoeven, Mike Rounds
and Tim Pawlenty.
And I've been meeting with
Senators Byron Dorgan, Kent
Conrad, and Amy Klobuchar, as
well as Congressmen Earl Pomeroy
and Collin Peterson,
to pledge my support.
I will continue to monitor
the situation carefully.
We will do what must be done to
help in concert with state and
local agencies and non-profit
organizations - and volunteers
who are doing so much to
aid the response effort.
For at moments like these, we
are reminded of the power of
nature to disrupt lives
and endanger communities.
But we are also reminded of the
power of individuals to make a
difference.
In the Fargodome, thousands of
people gathered not to watch a
football game or a rodeo,
but to fill sandbags.
Volunteers filled 2.5 million of
them in just five days, working
against the clock, day and
night, with tired arms and
aching backs.
Others braved freezing
temperatures, gusting winds, and
falling snow to build levees
along the river's banks to help
protect against waters that
have exceeded record levels.
College students have traveled
by the busload from nearby
campuses to lend a hand
during their spring breaks.
Students from local high schools
asked if they could take time to
participate.
Young people have turned
social networks into community
networks, coordinating with one
another online to figure out how
best to help.
In the face of an incredible
challenge, the people of these
communities have rallied
in support of one another.
And their service isn't just
inspirational - it's integral to
our response.
It's also a reminder of what we
can achieve when Americans come
together to serve
their communities.
Across the nation, there are
men, women and young people who
have answered that call, and
millions of others who would
like to.
Whether it's helping to reduce
the energy we use, cleaning up a
neighborhood park, tutoring in a
local school, or volunteering in
countless other ways, individual
citizens can make a big
difference.
That is why I'm so happy that
legislation passed the Senate
this week and the House
last week to provide more
opportunities for Americans to
serve their communities and the
country.
The bipartisan Senate bill was
sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch
and Senator Ted Kennedy,
leaders who embodies the spirit
of public service, and I am
looking forward to signing this
important measure into law.
In facing sudden crises or more
stubborn challenges, the truth
is we are all in this together
- as neighbors and fellow
citizens.
That is what brought so many
to help in North Dakota and
Minnesota and other areas
affected by this flooding.
That is what draws people to
volunteer in so many ways,
serving our country here
and on distant shores.
Our thanks go to them today, and
to all who are working day and
night to deal with the disaster.
We send them our thoughts, our
prayers, and our continued
assistance in this
difficult time.
Thank you.